%%Title: Aircraft Control
%%Version: v1.1
%%Date: 2017-01-11 10:07:46
#Aircraft Control

>###tl;dr
>In a typical quadcopter, four rotors are mounted in the extremities of the fuselage to provide *Lift* and control. Hexacopters use 6 rotors to provide the same control, but are usually capable of carrying a greater payload/camera.

##Configuration
The primary quadcopter configuration, and the one I will deal mainly with here, is an aircraft that has a central fuselage and four *Rotors* in each ‘corner’. 

The fuselage normally houses the *CPU*  and the battery. It also provides mounts for ancillaries, such as a camera or a hopper. A fixed, or retractable, landing gear is also mounted below.

Quadcopters may also be configured with two rotors fore and aft and two laterally. From an aerodynamic point of view there is little difference with this config, as the ‘front’ of a quadcopter is often irrelevant to its operation.

Hexacopters have six rotors and usually have retractable landing gear. They are  usually designed to be larger and carry greater payloads. Aerodynamic considerations are broadly similar. I will deal with specific hex issues later in this work.

In all cases, the rotors are mounted rigidly, usually at the end of pylons or outriggers. The rotor is mounted horizontally with it’s *Thrust* axis vertically upwards. The rotor is driven by an electric motor, also mounted on the pylon, which is powered electrically and controlled by the *CPU*.

The rigid mount means that the rotor can spin of course, but cannot move in the pitch or roll axes relative to the body (fuselage and outriggers) of the quadcopter. 

You may have noticed that most helicopters have a tail rotor as well as a main rotor. Without getting too technical, the tail rotor is required to counter the torque reaction on the helicopter’s fuselage caused by the engine and transmission driving the main rotor. If you want to know more, you can read more about helicopter anti-torque design features [here].

In the case of quadcopters, this torque reaction from the electric motors turning each rotor still exists, but the designers counter it with an elegant concept that does away with the requirement and weight of an anti-torque system but still provides the lift and control required. By changing the direction of rotation of two of the four rotors the torque reactions usually cancel out. That is why you will notice that adjacent rotors have their blades mounted so the angle of attack is opposite and those rotors rotate in opposite directions. 

##Control in the Hover
As discussed in the previous chapter, the only ‘control’ we have over the rotors is increasing or decreasing their *RRPM*. If you have skipped that discussion, you should go [back] and review it now.

These changes in RRPM are controlled by the *CPU*, it would be far too hard to do this manually. In most modern quads, the CPU receives internal control inputs from the GPS receiver and external inputs from your controller. Higher performance quads can be controlled without a GPS, but for now, we will only consider the more basic concept where a GPS keeps the quad stable and, with our controller we can move it where we want it to go.

The GPS provides a position to the CPU in three dimensions. That is, laterally in the form of a latitude and longitude, and vertically, in the form of an altitude. This altitude position is actually relative to the centre of the earth, but the CPU is clever and takes the initial, start up position and calls that zero and measures subsequent altitudes relative to that position.

The CPU is programmed to maintain the current GPS position unless it receives an external input from the controller in your hand. You control this external input by moving the two control sticks. These sticks can move the quad in the following ways:
* Climb and descend
* Fore and aft
* Sideways, and
* Yaw, that is changing the heading of the quad around its vertical axis.

These changes can be made in isolation, that is one control stick is moved in one direction only; or both sticks can be moved in a coordinated way to make the quad move in three dimensional space efficiently.

Let’s start by assuming that our quad is in a stable hover about 1 metre or 3 feet above the ground as shown in Figure 7.1.
(img)
You can see that each rotor is providing an equal amount of lift (the four green arrows are the same length). You can also see that adjacent rotors are turning in opposite directions. I have coloured the rear arrows red and the front ones white for orientation. The width of these arrows, as before, indicates the relative RRPM. 

Because each rotor disk is providing an equal amount of lift everything is level and stable. The total of the four equal green vectors is exactly equal and opposite to the orange weight vector and so the quad doesn’t climb or descend. As it is a little hard to see the relative length of the various lift vectors it is better to combine these into a single Big Green Arrow as you can see in the following figure.
(img)

##Climbing and Descending
With the lateral position being controlled by the CPU with reference to the GPS, climbing and descending the quad is straight forward. To make the quad go up, we manipulate the control stick to sign; to the CPU that we want the quad to climb. It commands the electric motors to increase the RRPM of all four rotors equally. 

You will remember that the amount of lift produced by an aerofoil is proportional to the velocity of that aerofoil squared so, for example, the RRPM does not have to be doubled to provide double the lift. If you are a little hazy on this concept, the explanation is [here].

So, when the CPU spins each rotor faster, each one produces more *Lift*. The total lift represented by the Big Green Arrow is now greater than the weight of the quad, represented by the orange *Weight* vector and the quad rises vertically.
(img)

Similarly, if you want the quad to descend, moving the relevant control stick commands the CPU to reduce the RRPM of all rotors so that less lift is produced and the lift vector has a lesser magnitude than the weight vector.
(img)

##Lateral Movement
It is important to understand that, from an aerodynamic point of view, there is no front, back or side to a quadcopter. Moving a quad forward, backwards or sideways is aerodynamically identical. It is only when a payload, such as a camera, is mounted that we need to know which end is the ‘front’.


pitch, roll yaw

##Control in Flight

climb, descent, translate, yaw (skid)
